Understanding the Concepts
Heat Absorption Principles
Heat is the molecular movement
of molecules in a substance.
The faster the molecules move,
the higher the temperature of a substance.
The amount of heat is measured in British thermal
units, or Btu’s.
A Btu is the amount of heat needed to raise the
temperature of one pound of water
by one degree Fahrenheit.
There are also two types of heat
sensible and latent.
Sensible heat is heat that causes a change
in the temperature of a substance but does
not change the state of the substance.
Latent heat is the amount of heat required
to cause a change of state of a substance
without changing its temperature.
A Btu content chart is used to understand the
amount of Btu’s it takes to change ice to
water, then to steam.
Looking at the #1 on the chart, we can
see that the ice is at 0 °F and has not absorbed
any heat Btu.
When the ice warms
to 32 °F, point 2, on the chart
it has not begun to melt; the ice absorbed 16 Btu’s
of sensible heat.
Going from point 2 to point 3 on the chart,
the ice melts.
Notice the temperature did not go up,
but the ice absorbed latent heat to change the
state of ice to liquid water.
Going from point 3 to 4, the water is absorbing
sensible heat and increasing its temperature to
212 °F.
The water absorbs 180 Btu’s to change the
temperature 180 °F.
From point 4 to 5, the water is boiling off
to a vapor.
The temperature of the water does not exceed
212° F, but it does absorb 970 Btu’s of latent heat
while changing state.
The Btu chart shows that when a substance is
boiling,
it is absorbing latent heat that yields the greatest
heat exchange.
Latent heat transfer takes place in the two heat
exchangers of the AC system,
the evaporator and the condenser.
The job of the evaporator is to absorb heat from
the air passing over it.
It does this by boiling the refrigerant and
absorbing the latent heat as well as the sensible
heat from the air.
By adjusting the pressure of the refrigerant,
we can adjust the boiling temperature as well.
For a substance to boil,
it has to overcome the pressure
pushing down on it.
Therefore, lowering the pressure will reduce the
boiling temperature.
Looking at a pressure temperature chart
for R134a, we can see that when the refrigerant
shows a pressure of 28 pounds per square inch,
or psig,
we know that the refrigerant will boil at 32 °F.
Heat travels from a substance at
a higher temperature to a substance at
a lower temperature, hot to cold.
Lowering the boiling temperature
of the refrigerant in the evaporator allows the
evaporator to operate at a temperature colder
than the air passing over it.
Boiling the refrigerant allows the AC system to
absorb as much heat as possible,
cooling the air as much as possible.
Through conduction, the cold refrigerant absorbs
the heat from the fins of the evaporator,
cooling the entire coil.
Through convection, the coil and the fins of the
evaporator absorb heat from the air passing
through it.
The refrigerant also relies on the principles
of convection to carry the heat to the condenser
to reject the heat from the AC system.
Now enter the simulation
for more on the principles of heat absorption.